article: add "Prevent layout shifts with CSS grid stacks" (#7)
hsablonniere/hsablonniere.com: pages/css-grid-superposition--qcj5jo/css-grid-superposition--qcj5jo.md

> ---

Reviewer: This is just a first comment to say: some of my suggestions are really tied to how _I_ would write this. So feel free to disregard them if they feel too far from your style! <3

title: Prevent layout shift with CSS grid superposition
date: Last Modified
layout: article.njk
---

<!-- TODO still some confusion between "we" and I -->

There are two reasons why people use CSS grid:

1. 😎 CSS is awesome! It's a fact, deal with it. 
1. 🛠️ Grid is a great tool to build complex two-dimensional layouts.

I sometimes have a third reason to use CSS grid, I call it the "anti layout shift superposition technique".

> Let me explain with some real examples.

Reviewer 2: I suggest: "Let me explain using some real life examples."

**NOTE:** This article is focused on layout shift occuring when toggling state on components.
We won't cover layout shift happening on first page load.

## Let's get some context

I work for [Clever Cloud](https://www.clever-cloud.com/en/), an IT automation platform.

> Our clients push their code and we handle the rest for them: build, deploy, host, scale, maintain, recover...

Reviewer 2: I try to avoid "..." at all costs. I prefer: "and so on", or a _periphrase_, something like "and all they need"

When they need to configure their applications, databases and other services, they use our web UI: "the console".
I spend most of my time on this project and it looks like this:

![Console overview of a Node.js application](./console-overview.png)

What you see in the screenshot above is the overview of my own site, a Node.js application hosted on our platform.

> On the right, you can see a pie chart which represents the repartition of HTTP response codes returned by the application in the last 24 hours.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
On the right, you can see a pie chart which represents the distribution of HTTP response codes returned by the application in the last 24 hours.
```

Reviewer 3: `cc-tile-status-codes-chart.png` is a different pie chart than `console-overview.png`. I'd expect the same pie chart, just zoomed in.

Reviewer: > cc-tile-status-codes-chart.png is a different pie chart than console-overview.png. I'd expect the same pie chart, just zoomed in.

I so agree with that. It bothered me at first read, then I forgot to comment when reading the markdown.

Author: I took a real screenshot of the app but I took screenshots of the component inside storybook with fake data to alter the CSS ;-)

I'll change that.

> On the right, you can see a pie chart which represents the repartition of HTTP response codes returned by the application in the last 24 hours.

Reviewer 2: I suggest: "a pie chart representing the repartition"

![UI Component displaying a chart](./cc-tile-status-codes-chart.png)

<!-- TODO -->

> When I worked on this component, I imagined our users would implicitly understand the chart is related to the current application.

Reviewer 2: Isn't "component" a capitalized word here? 
(common word vs concept, doc here: https://developers.google.com/style/capitalization)

> I decided to move some details like the exact number of requests in tooltips accessible via mouse and touch.

Reviewer: "To unclutter the display, I decided to move…"

> I decided to move some details like the exact number of requests in tooltips accessible via mouse and touch.

Reviewer 2: Here I would add some commas.
I suggest: " I decided to move some details, like the exact number of requests in tooltips, accessible via mouse and touch."

> The problem was, how do I explain the following details:

Reviewer: "With the chart all cleaned up, I faced a problem. How do I…"

Reviewer: (In my very style: "How would I…")

* The chart only displays data from the last 24 hours.

> * The legend items can be clicked to show/hide the different status code categories. Thank you [Chart.js](https://www.chartjs.org/)!

Reviewer 3: I don't think "legend items" is proper English.
```suggestion
* Each item in the legend can be clicked to show/hide the different status code categories. Thank you [Chart.js](https://www.chartjs.org/)!
```

> The available space was too small to add a title at the top or bottom of the chart so to help our users figure this out, I added an information button ℹ️ in the top right corner.

Reviewer: Isn't there a title already?

Also, Make that two sentences: "The available space… of the chart. To help our users figure…"
(Above ~18 words, a sentence is bloated.)

Reviewer 4: There is a title but it does not specify the range of the data.

Maybe this works better (with the split sentence as well):

```suggestion
The available space was too small to have a detailed title at the top or bottom of the chart. To help our users figure this out, I added an information button ℹ️ in the top right corner.
```

Author: I guess I meant a chart.js title, in the canvas etc, like we have on requests at the bottom.
I'll fix that, it's confusing.

> The available space was too small to add a title at the top or bottom of the chart so to help our users figure this out, I added an information button ℹ️ in the top right corner.

Reviewer 2: I suggest 2 sentences here, for more clarity: 

"The available space was too small to add a title at the top or bottom of the chart. So to help our users figure this out, I added an information button ℹ️ in the top right corner."

When they click on it, a short text is displayed in place of the chart like this:

![UI Component displaying some help](./cc-tile-status-codes-help.png)

> When they click on the cross icon, we hide the short text and display the chart again.

Reviewer 2: I suggest passive voice: 

"When the cross icon is clicked, the short text and is hidden and the chart displayed again."

Reviewer 2: Except if you want to insist on who does what!

> Implementing this toggle behaviour was not that hard.

Reviewer: "was" -> "is" ? That way you include the reader in your journey. (Or so I see it 😅)

Reviewer 4: Agreed. To me "was" means that you're just stating a fact and will not talk about this further. With "is", I expect that you are going to talk about it and explain how to implement this. And... you are so "is" works well here.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Implementing this toggle behaviour is not that hard.
```

Let's take a simplified version of the template:

```html
<div class="chart-component">
  <div class="title">
    HTTP response codes <button>toggle chart/info</button>
  </div>
  <div class="chart">
    <!-- chart here -->
  </div>
  <div class="info">
    <!-- short text here -->
  </div>
</div>
```

> With this HTML, we could simply toggle the component state between `.chart` and `.info` when the button is clicked and hide the appropriate panel with `display: none`.

Reviewer: "could" -> "can"
"and hide" -> "by hiding" 🤔

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
With this HTML, we can simply toggle the component state between `.chart` and `.info` when the button is clicked and hide the appropriate panel with `display: none`.
```

I don't think "by hiding" works here. @hsablonniere is talking about the technical state of the component not the rendered state so it is indeed two separate actions.

> With this HTML, we could simply toggle the component state between `.chart` and `.info` when the button is clicked and hide the appropriate panel with `display: none`.

Reviewer 2: I suggest: 

"**In** this HTML, we could, **when the button is clicked,** simply toggle the component state between `.chart` and `.info` and hide the appropriate panel with `display: none`."

## Layout shift problems

This approach has one big problem, it is subject to **layout shift**.

> > What is that?

Reviewer 2: I suggest "What is layout shift?" except if you are insisting on the _WTH is that!_ feeling.

When I work on such components, I tend to follow what I consider a good practice: don't set a fixed height on the component, let it adapt to its own content.
This is even more important in our situation because we have no way to know how much space we need to display the short text (without scrollbars).
The minimum required height will depend on:

* The unknown width of the component, which depends on usage context

> * The length of the short text, which depends on the translation (english or french)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* The length of the short text, which depends on the language (english or french)
```

We have the habit of saying "translation" in this context, but I'm pretty sure most people don't.

> The result is, when the short text is displayed, the component height is often a bit bigger than when the chart was displayed:

Reviewer: "Problem is, the .info text takes more space than the chart. When you display it, the component height gets a bit bigger than when the chart was displayed. This is called **layout shift**:"

:point_right: I think this whole part lacks a clear "definition" of layout shift.

Reviewer 4: A short definition could be put at the beginning of the article IMO.

Author: I'll rework the intro. It deserves a small "the show you're about to see" with a short desc of layout shift and maybe a video example.

> The result is, when the short text is displayed, the component height is often a bit bigger than when the chart was displayed:

Reviewer 2: I suggest: "The component height is a bit bigger containing a short text than containing a chart." for more clarity

![UI Component displaying some help](./heigh-change-en.png)

> The situation is worse in french because the text is a bit longer:

Reviewer 2: I suggest: "The issue is worse".

![UI Component displaying some help](./heigh-change-fr.png)

Depending on the situation, this innocent looking height change can have big impacts on the whole layout and the scroll position.
This kind of details can drive your users crazy:

* Best case scenario, other parts of the layout slightly move.

> * Worst case scenario: the button under the mouse cursor moves and something else is placed under.

Reviewer: I would drive the nail further by mentioning the twitter search that puts another result under your finger right before you click the one you wanted :exploding_head:

Author: It's the first bad example I had in mind, I'll either inline a video of this or an article about that if I can find one.

> * Worst case scenario: the button under the mouse cursor moves and something else is placed under.

Reviewer 2: ❓ And when using a touch? No mouse then.
I suggest adapting the text to the situation you described first. (about touch devices)

> In the animation below, you can see what happens when we start from the "info" state and click on the "Show the graph" button.

Reviewer: "The animation below shows what happens…" (I think I would have wrote it like you the first time, then rewrote it this way when reading myself afterwards. 😅)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The animation below shows what happens when we start from the "info" state and click on the "Show the graph" button.
```

> In the animation below, you can see what happens when we start from the "info" state and click on the "Show the graph" button.

Reviewer 2: ❓ Who is "we"?
Previously it was you as the provider of the service, refreshing content, etc.

I suggest: "In the animation below, you can see what happens when you start from the "info" state and click on the "Show the graph" button."

> ![UI Component displaying some help](./layout-shift-animation.gif)

Reviewer 3: I can't stand animated gifs anymore. As a user, I can't pause them or look at the frame I want. I'd switch to a video.

In general, file size is also a consideration but I'm not sure in this case with 2 frames.

Author: You're right, I was too lazy to do better but I was still like "meh".
I think I'll take time to record a short video where you see the cursor moving to the button et how it's lost...

Look carefully at the mouse cursor.
It does not move but a simple click on the button triggers a chain reaction:

* The height of the component is reduced to display the chart.
* The height of the whole page is reduced.
* The scrollbar is "disabled" (not necessary anymore).

> * The whole page is scrolled back to top and we can see the header again.

Reviewer 2: ❗ typo "The whole page is scrolled back to **the** top and we can see the header again."

As you can see, when the chart is displayed, the mouse cursor is now above some text.

> 

Reviewer: I would add something like "Now, how can we prevent this layout shift from happening?"

## The absolute position solution

> Before CSS grid, I would have solved this problem with the [position CSS property](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/position).

Reviewer 2: I suggest:
Before CSS grid, I would have **properly** solved this problem with the [position CSS]

Or it's a typo, and you mean "position CSS properties". ❓

First, I would use `visibility: hidden` instead of `display: none` to hide the "inactive" panel:

![UI Component displaying some help](./visibility-hidden-full-height.png)

As you can see, with `visibility: hidden`, the "inactive" panel is hidden but the component computes its own size as if both panels were there.

> Now, we have a component with a stable height, based on the heights of `.chart` and `.info`.

Reviewer 2: ❓ Here "we" go again
To me, it's a tone and style issue, worth to review it at the end, for more uniformity.

Then, I would use `position: absolute` on the `.chart`.
Doing this will [remove the element from normal flow](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/position#absolute).
This means the component will compute its own size as if `.chart` was not there.
Therefore, the component size would mostly depend on the size of `.info`, which is exactly what we want.

The only step left is to give `.chart` exactly the same position and size as `.info`.
Using `position: absolute` means `.chart` will be positioned *"relative to its closest positioned ancestor"*.

> It means, an ancestor with a `position` different from the default value (`static`).

Reviewer: "~It means~ That is"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
That is, an ancestor with a `position` different from the default value (`static`).
```

Most of the time, we use `position: relative` on the parent to trigger this.
In this situation, we would need an additional `.wrapper` around both panels like this:

```html
<div class="chart-component">
  <div class="title">
    HTTP response codes <button>toggle chart/info</button>
  </div>
  <div class="wrapper">
    <div class="chart">
      <!-- chart here -->
    </div>
    <div class="info">
      <!-- short text here -->
    </div>
  </div>
</div>
```

Now that we have this HTML, the CSS solution would look like this:

```css
.wrapper {
  /* .wrapper is the closest positioned ancestor of .chart */
  position: relative;
}

.chart {
  /* .chart is removed from normal flow, therefore
     .wrapper has the exact same size (and position) as .info
     because .info is the only child left in the normal flow
     .chart is positioned relatively to .wrapper */
  position: absolute;
  /* same position as .wrapper (thus same position as .info) */
  left: 0;
  top: 0;
  /* same size as .wrapper (thus same size as .info) */
  height: 100%;
  width: 100%;
}
```

If you're still struggling with how the position CSS property works, this technique can be scary but don't worry:

> * It's OK. You're not alone!

Reviewer 2: I suggest a ref to H2G2 with "Don't panic!" 😄

> * It gets better with time and practice... 

Reviewer 2: 😮 I'm sorry, what? What are you talking about, now? 🍑

Reviewer 2: I suggest _"It gets easier with time and practice..."_

Reviewer: I agree. It lacks a 😏 emoji.

Reviewer: (More seriously, It hit me at first read.)

> This solution helped us to achieve our goal.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This solution helped us achieve our goal.
```

The size of our component will now always depend on the size of `.info`, even when this panel is hidden and the chart is displayed.

> 😎 No more layout shift!

Reviewer: Between my last comment and this one, I would write something like "The trick is to remove the _smallest_ block from the flow. That way, `.wrapper` will be the size of the bigger one."
I have no idea where the best place is, though.

That would help you explain why this solution is not satisfying. (A rule of thumb I learnt (in french for the alliteration) : « Accélérer l'accès au sens »)
I know you already explain that later (at the end of your grid solution). But that's way too late.

Reviewer 3: I agree. The article needs to emphasise the drawback of the absolute positioning solution. Without the explanation, why should the reader bother to learn a new technique if the old ways perform well?

Author: Thanks, that's exactly the kind of feedback I need.
When I wrote that, I was hesistating and I guess the rythm of an article is not the same as a conference talk.

Author: I'll also emphasize the fact that walking into position: absolute territory is dangerous :laughing:

## The display grid solution

Now that we have CSS grid support in all evergreen browsers, we can rely on the fact that you can place and superpose multiple elements in the same areas.

> What do you mean by areas?

If you're not familiar with CSS grid, before continuing this article, I would advise you to:

> * Watch any talk from [Rachel Andrew](https://twitter.com/rachelandrew). This [recent video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g1osnSY9mSU) she did with [Jason Lengstorf](https://twitter.com/jlengstorf) is really nice.

Reviewer 2: I suggest to add more info (SEO or what?):

"This recent video about XXXXXXXX she did..."

* Always have the CSS-Tricks [complete guide to Grid](https://css-tricks.com/snippets/css/complete-guide-grid/) open in a tab.

> * Practice, practice, practice...

Reviewer: I feel this lacks a link to a TwoSetViolin video. :smirk: 
Or even three links to three TwoSetViolin videos/sites!!! :open_mouth:

Author: Tellement !

> Now that you're more familiar with CSS grid, we can get to the "anti layout shift superposition technique".

Reviewer: ~"we can get…"~ "let's get…"

Reviewer: Well, maybe not, if you already start the next sentence with "Let's", actually. :thinking:

> Now that you're more familiar with CSS grid, we can get to the "anti layout shift superposition technique".

Reviewer 2: > "anti layout shift superposition technique"

❓ Acronym? 
I sense it so bad: ALSST?

Let's take the initial simple template we had earlier:

> Let's take a simplified version of the template:

Reviewer: I think you forgot to remove this line. :wastebasket:

Author: I surely did!

```html
<div class="chart-component">
  <div class="title">
    HTTP response codes <button>toggle chart/info</button>
  </div>
  <div class="chart">
    <!-- chart here -->
  </div>
  <div class="info">
    <!-- short text here -->
  </div>
</div>
```

If we use CSS grid on `.chart-component` like this:

```css
.chart-component {
  display: grid;
  gap: 1rem;
}
```

> Our component would look like this:

Reviewer: ~"would look"~ "looks"
But maybe that's just me :sweat_smile:

Reviewer: The previous sentence being in the present tense, I feel this sentence has to, too.

Reviewer 4: The previous sentence starts with an "if" so "would" works fine here.

Reviewer: Yep, I was hesitant to comment here. **But** the "would" would feel more natural if the "If" sentence before was in the past tense: "If we used CSS grid … our component would".
Where "If we use CSS grid… our component looks" feels more natural.
Maybe that's just me :shrug:

Reviewer: Or even: when "if" is at the present tense, the "then" may be in the future tense:

"If we use… our component will look…" :thinking:

Reviewer 4: Oh definitely, my bad.

It should either be "will look" or "looks".

Author: You guys rock!

![UI Component displaying some help](./component-grid-all.png)

> Thanks to the awesome [CSS Grid Inspector](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Tools/Page_Inspector/How_to/Examine_grid_layouts) from Firefox's DevTools, we have annotations for columns and rows.

Reviewer 4: You are using the product name "DevTools", so "'s" is redundant here.

IMO you should either go with 

```suggestion
Thanks to the awesome [CSS Grid Inspector](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Tools/Page_Inspector/How_to/Examine_grid_layouts) from Firefox DevTools, we have annotations for columns and rows.
```

or

```suggestion
Thanks to the awesome [CSS Grid Inspector](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Tools/Page_Inspector/How_to/Examine_grid_layouts) from Firefox's developer tools, we have annotations for columns and rows.
```

Author: Their page says DevTools so.

We can see that:

* `.title`, `.chart` and `.info` are between column 1 and 2
* `.title` is between row 1 and 2
* `.chart` is between row 2 and 3
* `.info` is between row 3 and 4

> This is the default behaviour in a simple 1 column grid, children are placed in order.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This is the default behaviour in a simple 1 column grid: children are placed in order.
```

With `grid-column` and `grid-row`, we can force an element to be placed in a specific area of the grid.

For example, if we place our two elements in the same area like this:

```css
.chart,
.info {
  grid-column: 1 / 2;
  grid-row: 2 / 3;
}
```

> The result would look like this:

Reviewer: Same remark: "The result ~would look~ looks…"

Reviewer 4: And I disagree again. :D

"looks" would work if "if" was replaced with "when" or something.

![UI Component displaying some help](./component-grid-superposed.png)

Looks weird and unreadable, right?

> Yes but remember, we'll hide the appropriate panel with a `visibility: hidden`.

Reviewer: This feels weird. I would with "Now, we just have to toggle them using `visibility: hidden` and we are done!" or something like that.

Reviewer 4: I agree that this feels weird, it's not in the same style than the rest of the article.

> Yes but remember, we'll hide the appropriate panel with a `visibility: hidden`.

Reviewer 2: "Looks weird and unreadable, right?"

I suggest:
"If you are sceptikal, remember the appropriate panel is hidden (or will be hidden) with a `visibility: hidden`.

With this technique, we actually told the CSS engine to prepare a grid where the area at column `1 / 2` and row `2 / 3` should adapt to what's inside.

In other words: this very area will always be as big as the biggest between `.chart` and `.info`.
The height of the whole component will be the same when toggling between states.

> 😎 No more layout shift!

Reviewer 3: Good opportunity to add a video of the good case!

Author: Yep, don't tell, show!

> This solution is even better than the one with position absolute because if the text is really short, the component will adapt to the size of the chart.

Reviewer: See what I meant earlier about the "this comes too late". As a reader, I hate having to wait until this line, feeling like I'm missing the point during all the grid explanation.

Reviewer 4: Agreed!

Author: :+1:

> ## What else?

Reviewer 3: I like explicit titles and the next section is about applying this technique on the horizontal axis
```suggestion
## Preventing horizontal shifts
```

> ## What else?

Reviewer 2: Except if you are Georges, what is this?
[What else?](https://media.giphy.com/media/d2wxwaHEG95SSIsPDD/giphy.gif)

> &

Reviewer: Interesting choice 🤔

> &

Reviewer 5: I guess this `&` does not belong here... :-)

> We saw an example on the height of a component but you can also use this technique with width.

Reviewer: "This example was about the height of a component…"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This example was about the height of a component but you can also use this technique with width.
```

> If you look carefully at top right corner of the first screenshot, you'll see buttons.

Reviewer: Can "first screenshot" be a # link to the actual screenshot at the top of the page? :pray:

Reviewer 4: Or be inserted here again? That first screenshot is so far away from here.

Reviewer 4: After reading the next lines, I definitely think that the screenshot should just be inserted here again. Otherwise the reader would have to go back and forth.

Reviewer: Actually a gif that zooms onto the button <3

Reviewer 3: Instead of making the reader scroll back and look carefully, you could include a zoomed in screenshot on the part we're now focusing on.

```md
Let's take a look at some actions you can take in the console.

![UI Component displaying some help](./zoom-on-buttons.png)

See how the "Stop app" button has bigger
```

Author: I don't really like endless gif, I used one because I was lazy...
I'll put a zoomed screenshot again.

The "Stop app" button has bigger horizontal paddings than the other buttons.

> This is because, when you click on this very button, we replace the text with "Click to cancel" for 3 seconds so you can change your mind.

Reviewer: I would remove the first comma.

Reviewer: "you can change your mind" -> "you can ~panick~ and change your mind" :smirk:

Reviewer 4: > "you can change your mind" -> "you can ~panick~ and change your mind" smirk

(the "and" can be removed here)

> This is because, when you click on this very button, we replace the text with "Click to cancel" for 3 seconds so you can change your mind.

Reviewer 2: I suggest: "This is because, when clicking this very button, the text is replaced with "Click to cancel" for 3 seconds in case you changed your mind."

> If we didn't use the superposition technique, when the button change its text from "Stop app" to "Click to cancel", the width change would move all the other buttons like this:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If we didn't use the superposition technique; when the button changes its text from "Stop app" to "Click to cancel", the width change would move all the other buttons like this:
```

![UI Component displaying some help](./buttons-shift.png)

On narrow screens, the wrapping of the buttons could trigger new lines and even more shifting...

> Thanks to the "anti layout shift superposition technique", whatever the length of the "normal text" and the "cancel text", the button will always be big enough.

Reviewer: "whatever the length**s** of… "cancel text" **are**,"

> Thanks to the "anti layout shift superposition technique", whatever the length of the "normal text" and the "cancel text", the button will always be big enough.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Thanks to the "anti layout shift superposition technique", whatever the lengths of the "normal text" and the "cancel text" are, the button will always be big enough.
```

> Thanks to the "anti layout shift superposition technique", whatever the length of the "normal text" and the "cancel text", the button will always be big enough.

Reviewer 2: > anti layout shift superposition technique

Did you mean ALSST? 😄

![UI Component displaying some help](./buttons-no-shift.png)

😎 No more layout shift!

> 

Reviewer: Otherwise, thanks for that article! I learned a lot! I even learned the trick about making the smallest block absolute :grin: (which I won't use know that I know the "anti layout shift superposition technique" :sunglasses: )

Btw, it's very personal, but I would add a "I’m still looking for a better, more badass name. Please do have a shot a naming it in the comments!" at the end. But maybe you are not looking for a better name, you do you! :wink:
